hello my beautiful friends and welcome
back to roots and refuge farm today I
want to talk to you guys about why
vertical gardening just makes sense and
how easy it actually is so if you do a
quick search online for vertical
gardening it's going to come back up
with a lot of really cute ideas things
like pot suspended on a wall or gutters
built on a stair-step structure all
kinds of really great ideas for growing
plants upwards
however if what you have in mind is
gardening up for production little pots
aren't really going to be what you're
looking for I found and a lot of my
research that when I was looking for
vertical gardening information and
inspiration when it came to edibles
there wasn't really just a whole lot out
there so what exactly is Hartlepool
gardening it's curling things up pretty
much it doesn't have to be fancy it's
just growing things up instead of
allowing them to ramble around on the
ground so the first big question about
doing that would be why why would you
want to train your food to grow up well
there are a few really good reasons
first space I mean the footprint of this
squash plant if it were grown rambling
across the ground would be about 20
square feet you would have to a lot that
much space in your garden for that
single plant however by growing it up
and over this arched trellis it's
sharing a bed space with this pineapple
ground cherry with these cherry tomatoes
over on this side which though this is
one seed one plant on this it's planted
down in this corner over on this side
where it's growing down there are more
plants tomatoes and another ground
cherry some herbs and
now this plan is growing over this
walkway so the footprint gets reduced
from 20 square feet to I mean almost
none I mean it's literally a lot of just
a few square feet on both sides where
the trellises and other than that it's
just covering the walkway adding Beauty
to the garden the second benefit of
vertical gardening is how much easier it
makes harvesting and for instance these
cucumbers they're right here at a waist
height so I get to just stand here and
pick them picking stuff when it's
upright is so much easier on your back
and your knee this is a whole lot easier
than crawling around on the ground
looking for your fruit underneath all
the leaves and it puts your food up
right in front of you so you're not as
likely to miss fruits I don't know about
you but I know that even with vertical
garden I occasionally get surprised by a
huge cucumber or something that I
completely missed but I know that when I
was growing things on the ground I was
much more frequently surprised by fruits
that we had been hidden underneath the
foliage the third benefit of vertical
gardening is it makes for much healthier
plants whenever you've got your plants
trained up a trellis they're not lying
there in the dirt and they're not
getting splash back from watering and
rain upon the leaves therefore they're
not staying moist moist foliage and your
plants getting dirty like that that's a
huge recipe for bacterial and fungal
infections blights
wilts and when your fruit is hanging up
off the ground it's out of the reach of
little critters that would like to come
along and eat it before you get a chance
to the last benefit of vertical
gardening is that it's beautiful it adds
line and structure to the design of your
garden while being completely functional
it puts your food on display so that you
can come out and enjoy it as it grows
and it makes for spaces that are just
interesting
and engaging as well as very productive
so we can agree that vertical gardening
is definitely functional
it's definitely aesthetically pleasing
but is it economical well like with most
things it really depends on how you go
about it there are going to be different
kinds of trellises for all different
kinds of price ranges now I really don't
think it's necessary to go to a home
center and buy trellises that are
marketed to gardeners for the purpose of
trellising I just don't think it's
feasible I don't think it's functional
but you don't have to take my word for
it let's go check out exactly how
expensive buying vertical trellises can
be I chose to check prices at the Home
Depot this is where I come and buy
things when I need them for my homestead
obviously things would be even more
expensive if you were to go to something
like a specialty garden center when I
figured this would be a good place to
look to find what the low end of prices
on something like this would be okay
here we have some decorative trellises
the 72 inch one and is $35.98
oh yeah 3498 on this 80 inch scroll
trellis these hooks here are 1278 each
here just these regular like a pot
trellis for $10 a fan trellis for 15
obviously if you are deciding to go that
route things would add up really quickly
if you were growing much of anything at
all because you know one of those 80
inch trellises could probably handle
like a cucumber plant so if you're
looking at doing any sort of canning or
if you are supporting a you know a large
family off your garden it's just not
going to be feasible at all to come by
trellises for that scale of production
I'm looking for fencing if you're on
your anyone total vacuum force dancers
I'm not finding it found it I was on the
wrong end of the story
all right so now let's talk about what
else you could use instead of buying
trellises that are packaged for the
purpose of trellising plants now I
understand that some people may have a
completely different goal for me they
may want a really pretty garden where
everything is fancy it may be beneficial
to them to have some sort of trellises
that are very elaborate or decorative I
give you that that is beautiful however
in the case of my garden it was for me a
matter of how do I make it as functional
and productive as possible while keeping
the price point as low as possible and
then within that making it beautiful so
just really quick let's look at some of
these fencing materials that they have
here at home home depot another reason
why I came here is because this is more
widely available as far as looking at
the price points whereas you know if I
go to my local farmers co-op they might
have a really great deal but it's not
available to most of you so here we have
a 50-foot row of welded wire for 35
dollars that's 50 feet for 35 dollars at
600 inches so for pretty much the same
price point of getting 80 inches of
vertical trellising space if you buy a
premade trellis that is that is packaged
to you for the purpose of trellising
plants you can get 600 inches of a
material that everything I've ever grown
would climb just fine on this now you
have to unroll it you have to cut it you
have to attach it to something to stand
it upright we have typically used T
posts for this they run three to five
dollars each depending on how tall they
are here our T posts down here we've got
a 5 foot you posts for 4 dollars
six-foot t-post 4 4 448 obviously these
are really affordable options here is a
6 foot steel tee post for 378 hairs
chicken wire now chicken wire doesn't
isn't going to hold up as long as these
welded wire fencing materials or cattle
panels which are my favorite things to
use for trellises but I'm trying to show
some other options since I know not
everybody has those available to them
but this is like a coated chicken wire
PVC coated green poultry netting $20 for
a 25 foot roll it's 2 feet wide you
could quite simply take all kinds of
frames and attach the chicken wire and
create some sort of trellis you could
take an old bed frame that you could
take an old window frame you could take
a pallet and knock out some of the
center boards and just staple some
chicken wire and prop it up what you're
trying to create is just some sort of
sturdy framework for your plants to be
able to grab hold of and grow up now my
preferred route is obviously cattle
panels we we call these cattle panels
they come in 18-foot pieces this is what
we've made our just out of you haven't
seen our video on that you can check it
out I'll put the link in the bio you can
cut these we use bolt cutters in order
to cut them and configure them in all
different kinds of ways they might be
sold as hog panels livestock panels but
if you call any sort of like farm supply
store or tractor supply anything like
that and describe this what you're
looking for cattle panels hog panels
they'll know what you're talking about
they are only 20 to 25 dollars each I've
had some people tell me in their area
that they're 30-plus dollars even with
that being the case it is more
economical than buying pre-made
trellises that are sold for the purpose
of gardening but let's say you don't
have the budget to go out and buy cattle
panels that doesn't mean vertical
gardening is out of the question for you
there are a lot of ways that you can
create trellises
on a budget by using found materials one
good way to get materials if you cannot
afford to buy them is find out if anyone
in your area has any fencing that they
no longer want gates fencing fence posts
all of that stuff a lot of times people
are looking to get rid of stuff like
that but they just need someone to haul
it off or come take it down yeah that's
a little bit of Labor but if it saves
you a whole lot of money it's worth it
this trellis which we have tomatoes
growing up right now it's just a piece
of 6-foot fence that we unrolled and
attached to some tea posts they're all
mix match Heights and we're gonna grow
tomatoes up this two pieces of a dog
crate that someone gave us because the
door on it was broken those set back in
are kind of a junk for a while and I
finally brought him up here and I'm
growing squash on the here's a gate I'm
pretty sure someone gave this to us
because they said you know hey we're
about to put this out at the side of the
road we replaced our fencing and we
thought maybe you could do something
with it so we picked that up we use zip
ties to connect everything all of this
all of these are materials which are
affordable they're pretty easy to put
together it doesn't take does it take
any grand carpentry skills to drive a
tee post and attach up you know a gate
or a piece of metal fencing to that T
post with zip ties but let's say that
you are not in a place where you can get
those things say you don't have a truck
or you don't have the ability to move
the manoeuvre these big panels by
yourself before I had this garden before
I had all of these trellises I grew peas
and beans pull beans and climbing peas
by just putting a few tea posts in the
ground and running clothesline between
them it just gave the peas and the beans
something to climb up it worked
wonderfully at the end of the season I
did have to take it down whereas these
things you put up and you could leave
them up for years if you wanted to
so what can you grow vertically pole
beans these particular ones are called
noodle beans runner beans any sort of
climbing bean you don't even have to
coax them just plant them at the base of
a trellis like this and they do the rest
this is especially beneficial if you
don't have a large garden and you don't
have the space to grow a whole lot of
bush beans or rows of beans you can grow
way more beans on one pole being plant
than one bush bean plant because
essentially when it comes to beans a
pole bean is the equivalent of an
indeterminate tomato whereas a bush bean
is the equivalent of a determinate
variety it means that as long as you
continue to provide support for them and
keep those plants healthy they will
continue to put off flowers and
therefore put off more beans whereas a
bush bean has a determined amount of
flowers and a determined amount of beans
when they're done they're done a pole
bean however will keep producing
throughout the season so if you've got a
small amount of space you benefit way
more from growing a row of pole beans
than you do a row of bush beans but you
have to provide them some sort of
trellising to keep them upright so they
stay healthy so they continue to produce
and so you can continue to harvest them
throughout the season forcing them to
produce more another natural primer is
cucumbers cucumber plants if you grow
them at the base of a trellis they will
grab hold of that trellis with their
tendrils and just take off you might
have to catch little runaways like this
and kind of train it back up by tucking
the leaves through the trellis and keep
an eye on them because they have a
tendency to grab hold of their neighbors
and can choke out other plants however
they are super easy to grow on a trellis
and by growing them upwards you avoid a
lot of the plights and the fungus is
powdery mildew and the kind of things
that often take out cucumber plants
because they're up off the ground and
therefore the foliage stays dry so pull
beans which include fresh eating
dried beans runner beans peas I don't
have any of those growing right now
because it's too hot for them here but
we have grown many peas and all these
different kinds of trellises another
thing you can grow on a trellis is
melons
they are also natural climbers which
that they have tendrils which kind of
grab hold of the trellis and take off
and growing melons vertically you do
sometimes have to offer some sort of
support as you can see here this
particular melon is an pantyhose it's
just kind of playing around with that
some of these are not supported right
now and they're doing okay
however for a bigger melon like a
watermelon or anything it's gonna have a
lot of weight to it you would want to
offer it some support to keep the stems
from breaking when they start getting
brittle towards the end of the melon
ripening tomatoes tomatoes are not
natural climbers they actually will
naturally just kind of sprawl out a
wrong ground and grow more roots if
they're given the chance indeterminate
tomatoes like I was talking about the
beans they will grow as long as you will
provide support for them and most tomato
cages are like 30 to 36 inches tall them
like the Jumbo tomato cages they are you
know maybe 48 inches tall these
trellises are four feet cattle panels
which we have suspended up about 20
inches now they're in raised beds so as
you can see these trellises are quite a
lot taller than me and these plants are
quite a lot taller than the trellises
see if we will provide more space to
grow up we will get more Tomatoes they
stay healthier it promotes air flow so
vertical gardening this this extends to
things that we might not even think
about things like tomatoes if we give
them the space to grow up they will and
in that that increases your harvest
which is the point of growing this stuff
in the first place what about the
subject of squash well let's take a look
here
this is called awarded Incan creampuff
squash which is a large
variety of winter squash now my first
year to have a big garden with a lot of
vertical trellises I had read a blog
that basically said that you could train
summer squash to grow up Bush summer
squashes specifically like zucchinis
yellow crookneck so I tried it and it
wasn't great now here is a big healthy
bush squash plant and if you look in
here I'll show you how this grows it's
got one wrong stalk it comes up from the
ground and then all of these leaves that
come off of it so technically yes you
could train this to grow up however in
my experience it's really not worth it
um that stalk this is a this is a pretty
mature plant this is been producing for
almost six weeks now that's pretty long
for a summer squash and from the ground
to the end of that stalk is maybe thirty
inches that's that's not very long
that plant is doing just fine allowing
it to Bush know if you had a really
limited space you could train that main
stalk up like a tea post or someplace
out by tying it off however it did not
want to go up and it would take daily
coming out and training that tying it up
every single day and making sure all the
new growth is being trained to go up in
order for that to grow that way I
decided that wasn't worth it for me if
you wanted to try it you know more power
to you I think that you could do it I
just don't know that it's necessarily
worth it because the thing is is those
leaves are still going to branch out
really far it's still gonna have this
huge leaves on those long stems and it's
still going to take up you know a radius
of a couple of feet even if it was
trained up on a center stalk
know if that was really worth it however
winter squash varieties like this warded
Incan cream puffs this is the main stalk
of the worded Incan cream puff and this
is one plant from one seed and it comes
all the way over and all the way down
one winter squash plant can take up
almost 20 square feet if allowed to
trail along the ground I putting this
one plant on this arch trellis I've
minimized the footprint greatly so it's
not taking up a huge portion of the
garden it's actually just growing over
the walkway here now vining winter
squashes like this one they they do have
tendrils and they will climb
however they kind of just go wherever
and you have to just sort of train them
back now I check on this squash daily
and whenever little branches like this
kind of take off I just sort of run it
back through this trellis and in doing
so we've managed to keep this squash on
this trellis and it's covering almost
the entire thing the plant is healthy
it's not being riddled by any sort of
like powdery mildew or anything like
that and when the squash that it puts
off started getting really big I'll
provide it some support with other
pantyhose or like a plastic produce bag
and that allows me to grow a winter
squash plant in a raised bed whereas if
you didn't grow them somehow up and out
of the way you might not be able to do
that at all when it comes to growing
squash the real question that you need
to figure out if you're trying to decide
if it is going to need vertical support
is whether it is a bush habit or a
vining habit many winter squashes are
vining habits
however there are some that are Bush
habits and most summer squashes are Bush
habits so you just kind of have to look
at it into it whenever you buy your
seeds which kind of squash you're
dealing with and therefore you'll know
if it is something that
be trying to a trellis so obviously on
these plants that have heavier fruit
like a winter squash or a watermelon
these are going to require a sturdier
trellis whereas with peas or beans
that's where you can really utilize like
a string Chellis you could even probably
do that with some smaller cucumber
varieties you'd have no problem using a
you know clothesline or twine or
something that you had tied up very
tightly that had a lot of good tension
and strength and support I've actually
found it really surprising that more
people don't grow things vertically
however I think that a lot of people are
discounting that as an option because
they simply think it's gonna be a lot of
work to establish or a large financial
investment which it doesn't have to be I
really do believe that so many people
could benefit from growing their plants
vertically and just have a more
successful and enjoyable gardening
experience now it might take some
resourceful thinking and a little bit
more work on the front end to get it
established but I really do believe that
it can be a huge help in having a more
successful growing year you have any
questions about this please put it down
in the comments I'll be happy to help
you and if we get a whole lot of
questions I might do another video kind
of explaining that stuff but I really I
really do want to encourage you guys to
look around at the resources that you
have and think about implementing some
of these things in your own garden I
really hope this helps you guys thank
you so much for watching until next time
[Music]